Temperature Measurement
=======================

17.3   Operation

The ADC converts an analog input voltage to a 10-bit digital value through successive approximation. The minimum value represents GND and the maximum value represents the voltage on VCC, the voltage on the AREF pin or an internal 1.1V / 2.56V voltage reference.

The voltage reference for the ADC may be selected by writing to the REFS[2:0] bits in ADMUX. The VCC supply, the AREF pin or an internal 1.1V / 2.56V voltage reference may be selected as the ADC voltage reference. Optionally the internal 2.56V voltage reference may be decoupled by an external capacitor at the AREF pin to improve noise immunity.

The analog input channel and differential gain are selected by writing to the MUX[3:0] bits in ADMUX. Any of the four ADC input pins ADC[3:0] can be selected as single ended inputs to the ADC. ADC2 or ADC0 can be selected as positive input and ADC0, ADC1, ADC2 or ADC3 can be selected as negative input to the differential gain amplifier.

If differential channels are selected, the differential gain stage amplifies the voltage difference between the selected input pair by the selected gain factor, 1x or 20x, according to the setting of the MUX[3:0] bits in ADMUX.

This amplified value then becomes the analog input to the ADC. If single ended channels are used, the gain amplifier is bypassed altogether.

If ADC0 or ADC2 is selected as both the positive and negative input to the differential gain amplifier (ADC0-ADC0 or ADC2-ADC2), the remaining offset in the gain stage and conversion circuitry can be measured directly as the result of the conversion. This figure can be subtracted from subsequent conversions with the same gain setting to reduce offset error to below 1 LSW.

The on-chip temperature sensor is selected by writing the code "1111" to the MUX[3:0] bits in ADMUX register when the ADC4 channel is used as an ADC input.

The ADC is enabled by setting the ADC Enable bit, ADEN in ADCSRA. Voltage reference and input channel selections will not go into effect until ADEN is set. The ADC does not consume power when ADEN is cleared, so it is recommended to switch off the ADC before entering power saving sleep modes.

The ADC generates a 10-bit result which is presented in the ADC Data Registers, ADCH and ADCL. By default, the result is presented right adjusted, but can optionally be presented left adjusted by setting the ADLAR bit in ADMUX.

If the result is left adjusted and no more than 8-bit precision is required, it is sufficient to read ADCH. Otherwise, ADCL must be read first, then ADCH, to ensure that the content of the data registers belongs to the same conversion. Once ADCL is read, ADC access to data registers is blocked. This means that if ADCL has been read, and a conversion completes before ADCH is read, neither register is updated and the result from the conversion is lost.

When ADCH is read, ADC access to the ADCH and ADCL Registers is re-enabled.

The ADC has its own interrupt which can be triggered when a conversion completes. When ADC access to the data registers is prohibited between reading of ADCH and ADCL, the interrupt will trigger even if the result is lost.

17.4   Starting a Conversion

A single conversion is started by writing a logical one to the ADC Start Conversion bit, ADSC. This bit stays high as long as the conversion is in progress and will be cleared by hardware when the conversion is completed. If a different data channel is selected while a conversion is in progress, the ADC will finish the current conversion before performing the channel change.

Alternatively, a conversion can be triggered automatically by various sources. Auto Triggering is enabled by setting the ADC Auto Trigger Enable bit, ADATE in ADCSRA. The trigger source is selected by setting the ADC Trigger Select bits, ADTS in ADCSRB (see description of the ADTS bits for a list of the trigger sources). When a positive edge occurs on the selected trigger signal, the ADC prescaler is reset and a conversion is started. This provides a method of starting conversions at fixed intervals. If the trigger signal still is set when the conversion completes, a new conversion will not be started. If another positive edge occurs on the trigger signal during conversion, the edge
will be ignored. Note that an Interrupt Flag will be set even if the specific interrupt is disabled or the Global Interrupt Enable bit in SREG is cleared. A conversion can thus be triggered without causing an interrupt. However, the Interrupt Flag must be cleared in order to trigger a new conversion at the next interrupt event.

Using the ADC Interrupt Flag as a trigger source makes the ADC start a new conversion as soon as the ongoing conversion has finished. The ADC then operates in Free Running mode, constantly sampling and updating the ADC Data Register. The first conversion must be started by writing a logical one to the ADSC bit in ADCSRA. In this mode the ADC will perform successive conversions independently of whether the ADC Interrupt Flag, ADIF is cleared or not.

If Auto Triggering is enabled, single conversions can be started by writing ADSC in ADCSRA to one. ADSC can also be used to determine if a conversion is in progress. The ADSC bit will be read as one during a conversion, independently of how the conversion was started.

...

17.12 Temperature Measurement

The temperature measurement is based on an on-chip temperature sensor that is coupled to a single ended ADC4 channel. Selecting the ADC4 channel by writing the MUX[3:0] bits in ADMUX register to "1111" enables the temperature sensor. The internal 1.1V reference must also be selected for the ADC reference source in the temperature sensor measurement. When the temperature sensor is enabled, the ADC converter can be used in single conversion mode to measure the voltage over the temperature sensor.

The measured voltage has a linear relationship to the temperature as described in Table 17-2. The sensitivity is approximately 1 LSB/C and the accuracy depends on the method of user calibration. Typically, the measurement accuracy after a single temperature calibration is +- 10C, assuming calibration at room temperature. Better accuracies are achieved by using two temperature points for calibration.

Table 17-2. Temperature vs. Sensor Output Voltage (Typical Case)

Temperature -40C     +25C     +85C
ADC         230 LSB  300 LSB  370 LSB

The values described in Table 17-2 are typical values. However, due to process variation the temperature sensor output voltage varies from one chip to another. To be capable of achieving more accurate results the temperature measurement can be calibrated in the application software. The sofware calibration can be done using the formula:

T = k * [(ADCH << 8) | ADCL] + TOS

where ADCH and ADCL are the ADC data registers, k is the fixed slope coefficient and TOS is the temperature sensor offset. Typically, k is very close to 1.0 and in single-point calibration the coefficient may be omitted. Where higher accuracy is required the slope coefficient should be evaluated based on measurements at two temperatures.


ATtiny25/45/85 [DATASHEET]
2586Q-AVR-08/2013
